A Web Based Application for Student Management System
A Project Report submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of
degree of
Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science and Engineering

A. BHANU TEJA (22B81A05CG)
B. SRIDHAR (22B81A05EG)
S. VARSHITH (22B81A05EK)

Department of Computer Science and Engineering

CVR COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
(An UGC Autonomous Institution, Affiliated to JNTUH,
Accreditedby NBA, and NAAC)
Vastunagar, Mangalpalli (V), Ibrahimpatnam (M),
Ranga Reddy (Dist.) - 501510, Telangana State
2023-24

CVRCOLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
(An UGC Autonomous Institution, Affiliated to JNTUH,
Accredited by NBA, and NAAC) Vastunagar, Mangalpalli (V), Ibrahimpatnam (M),
Ranga Reddy (Dist.) - 501510, Telangana State.

DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
CERTIFICATE

This is to certify that the Miniproject work entitled “A Web Based
Application for Student Management System” is being submitted by A.
BHANU TEJA (22B81A05CG), B. SRIDHAR (22B81A05EG) and S.
VARSHITH (22B81A05EK) in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award
of the Minor degree of Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science and
Engineering, during the academic year 2023-2024.

Professor Incharge

Professor and Head, CSE
Dr. A. Vani Vathsala

External Examiner

DECLARATION
I hereby declare that this Mini project report titled “A Web Based Application for
Student Management System” submitted to the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, CVR College of Engineering, is a record of original work done by
us. The information and data given in the report is authentic to the best of our
knowledge. This Mini project report is not submitted to any other university or
institution for the award of any degree or diploma or published at any time before.

A. Bhanu Teja(22B81A05CG)
B. Sridhar(22B81A05EG)
S. Varshith(22B81A05EK)

Date: 27/05/2024
Place: Hyderabad

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The satisfaction that accompanies the successful completion of any task would be
incomplete without the mention of people who made it possible and whose
encouragement and guidance has been a source of inspiration throughout the course of
the project.

It is a great pleasure to convey our profound sense of gratitude to our principal Dr. K.

Ramamohan Reddy, Dr.A.Vani Vathsala,, Head of CSE Department, CVR College
of Engineering, for having been kind enough to arrange necessary facilities for
executing the project in the college.

We wish a deep sense of gratitude and heartfelt thanks to management for providing
excellent lab facilities and tools. Finally, we thank all those whose guidance helped us
in this regard.

i

ABSTRACT

A web Based Application for Student Management System deals with the
maintenance of university, college, faculty, student information within the university.
SGS is an automation system, which is used to store the college, faculty, student,
courses and information of a college. Starting from registration of a new student in
the college, it maintains all the details regarding the attendance and marks of the
students. The project deals with retrieval of information through an INTRANET
based campus wide portal. It collects related information from all the departments of
an organization and maintains files, which are used to generate reports in various
forms to measure individual and overall performance of the students.

Development process of the system starts with System analysis.
System analysis involves creating a formal model of the problem to be solved by
understanding requirements.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page No.

List of Figures
Abbreviations
1

I

Introduction
1.1

Motivation

1
2

1.2

Problem statement

2

1.3

Project Objectives

3

Literature Survey

4

2.1

Existing work

4

2.2

Limitations of Existing work

5

Software & Hardware specifications

7

3.1

Software requirements

7

3.2

System specifications

7

3.3

User requirements

7

Proposed System Design

9

4.1

Proposed methods

9

4.2

Architecture Diagram

10

4.3

Use case Diagram

10

4.4

Technology Description

11

Implementation & Testing

13

5.1

Implementation

13

5.2

Testing

19

2

3

4

5

6

Conclusion & Future scope
6.1

Conclusion

22

6.2

Future Scope

22

References

23

iii

Abbreviations
•

SMS – Student Management System

•

OpenEMIS - open-source educational management information system

•

GDPR - General Data Protection Regulation

•

FERPA. - Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

•

RFID – Radio Frequency Identification

iv

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

A Student Management System is an environment that manages all the data of the
students who are studying in an educational institution. This data is computerized
through an automated system. Here, computerization is more advantageous than the
usual method. Thus, a student management system offers many benefits to an
educational institution. It allows teachers to easily change and access student data,
and parents can easily focus on children with a clear environment to meet state level
compliance and other regulatory requirements.
This system we have created also facilitates the entry, maintenance and viewing and
of all authorized student details. Here we mainly focus on the examination of
students, their subjects, the registration department which conducts the registration
process, the examination department which conducts the examinations, the IT
division which is important component of the result and the smart ID components.
The special thing is that we have given all the students a unique ID and the degree
program they are involved in has also focused on age, gender and contact number.
Each department has a unique ID. For convenience, a designated location and e-mail
address are also used.
In contemporary educational settings, the effective management of student-related
data and administrative processes stands as a cornerstone for the successful operation
of educational institutions. Traditional methods of paper-based record-keeping and
disjointed software solutions often fall short in meeting the dynamic demands of
modern education. Consequently, there arises a pressing need for a comprehensive
solution that can streamline administrative tasks, foster seamless communication
among stakeholders, and elevate overall operational efficiency. This project
endeavors to address this need by developing a robust web-based Student
Management System (SMS), tailored to cater to the specific requirements of
educational institutions. By providing a centralized platform for managing student
data, academic records, and administrative processes, the proposed SMS aims to
revolutionize the management of educational institutions, facilitating informed
decision-making, enhancing collaboration, and promoting student success.

1

1.1. MOTIVATION
The impetus behind the development of a web-based Student Management System
stems from a recognition of the myriad challenges faced by educational institutions
in managing student-related information using outdated or fragmented systems.
These challenges manifest in various forms:
- Inefficiencies in administrative workflows: Manual data entry, reliance on paperbased records, and the use of disparate systems contribute to inefficiencies and errors
in managing student information.
- Communication barriers: Limited or outdated communication channels impede
effective collaboration and engagement among administrators, teachers, students, and
parents.
- Lack of real-time access to data: Difficulty in accessing up-to-date student records,
academic progress, and attendance information hampers timely interventions and
informed decision-making.
The development of a web-based SMS is motivated by a desire to alleviate these
challenges and empower educational institutions with a modern, integrated solution
for managing student information, fostering communication, and enhancing
operational efficiency.
1.2. PROBLEM STATEMENT

The problem at hand revolves around the absence of an efficient and comprehensive
system for managing student-related information and administrative processes within
educational institutions. Current systems often exhibit deficiencies such as:
- Fragmentation in data management: Student data is often dispersed across multiple
systems or maintained in disparate spreadsheets, leading to duplication of efforts and
inconsistencies in information.
- Communication bottlenecks: Insufficient communication tools hinder effective
collaboration between stakeholders, resulting in delays and misunderstandings.
- Manual administrative tasks: Labor-intensive processes for tasks like enrollment,
attendance tracking, and grade management are prone to errors and consume
valuable time and resources.

2

1.3. PROJECT OBJECTIVES

The primary objectives of the Student Management System are as follows:
•

Efficiency: Streamline administrative processes, reduce manual tasks, and
improve overall operational efficiency within the educational institution.

•

Transparency: Provide stakeholders with transparent access to student data,
academic records, and communication channels, fostering trust and
accountability.

•

Engagement: Enhance student engagement and academic success by
providing access to resources, grades, attendance records, and communication
tools.

•

Collaboration:

Facilitate

collaboration

and

communication

among

administrators, teachers, students, and parents, promoting a cohesive learning
environment.
•

Data-driven Decision Making: Enable data-driven decision-making by
providing comprehensive reporting and analytics capabilities to track student
performance, enrollment trends, and institutional metrics.

3

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW

A literature review on (SMS) explores existing research, technologies, challenges,
and trends in the development and implementation of such systems. The review
covers various aspects, including historical context, technological advancements,
functional components, and the impact of these systems on educational institutions.
Here is an organized overview for a literature review on student management
systems:
2.1 EXISTING WORK
In the domain of student management systems, a multitude of solutions exist, each
with its unique features, strengths, and weaknesses. These existing systems serve as
foundational pillars for educational institutions worldwide, facilitating efficient
management of student data, academic progress tracking, and administrative tasks.
Below are some of the prominent existing systems:
1. OpenEMIS: OpenEMIS stands out as an open-source educational
management information system. It offers a comprehensive suite of tools for
managing student records, teacher information, and administrative tasks.
OpenEMIS emphasizes accessibility and affordability, making it particularly
attractive to resource-constrained educational institutions, especially in
developing regions.
2. PowerSchool: Widely recognized as a leading student information system,
PowerSchool boasts a user-friendly interface and a robust set of features.
From attendance tracking to grade management and parent communication,
PowerSchool caters to the needs of K-12 schools and districts, streamlining
administrative processes and enhancing collaboration between educators,
students, and parents.

4

3. Schoology: Schoology transcends the boundaries of a traditional student
management system by integrating learning management functionalities. This
platform empowers educators to create engaging online courses, manage
curriculum content, and assess student learning outcomes effectively.
Schoology's seamless integration of course management with student
information makes it a popular choice among educators seeking to leverage
technology for educational excellence.
4. Fedena: Fedena emerges as a comprehensive school management software
solution tailored to the diverse needs of educational institutions. With
modules covering admissions, attendance, examinations, finance, and more,
Fedena offers a holistic approach to student management. Its flexibility and
scalability make it suitable for schools of all sizes, from small independent
schools to large university campuses.
5. CampusVue:

Catering

specifically

to

higher

education

institutions,

CampusVue specializes in providing advanced student information system
functionalities. From admissions management to academic advising and
student financials, CampusVue addresses the unique challenges faced by
colleges and universities in managing student data and supporting student
success initiatives.

2.2 LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING WORK

Despite their significant contributions to education management, existing student
management systems are not without their limitations. Understanding these
limitations is essential for informing the development of more effective and inclusive
solutions:
1. Cost: Many commercial student management systems come with hefty
licensing fees and ongoing maintenance costs, posing a significant financial
barrier to adoption, particularly for cash-strapped educational institutions
with limited budgets.

5

2. Scalability: Some student management systems struggle to accommodate the
scalability requirements of growing educational institutions or large-scale
deployments. Issues such as performance degradation and system instability
may arise when handling a high volume of data or concurrent user
interactions.
3. Customization: While certain systems offer customization options, achieving
a tailored solution that aligns precisely with an institution's unique workflows
and requirements may necessitate extensive development efforts or thirdparty integrations, thereby increasing complexity and cost.
4. Integration Challenges: Integrating student management systems with other
educational software applications, such as learning management systems
(LMS), financial management systems, or library management systems, can
be complex and time-consuming. Incompatibilities between systems, data
synchronization

issues,

and

API limitations

may

hinder

seamless

interoperability and data exchange.
5. Usability Concerns: Despite efforts to improve user interfaces and user
experiences, some student management systems remain complex and
unintuitive, requiring extensive training and technical support for
administrators, teachers, and staff to effectively navigate and utilize the
system's features.
6. Data Security Risks: Safeguarding sensitive student data from unauthorized
access, data breaches, or cyberattacks is paramount. However, not all student
management systems incorporate robust security measures, leaving
educational institutions vulnerable to potential data security threats and
compliance risks, such as GDPR or FERPA violations.
7. Support and Maintenance: The level of technical support and ongoing
maintenance provided by vendors varies widely. Educational institutions may
encounter challenges in obtaining timely assistance, troubleshooting issues,
or receiving software updates and bug fixes, potentially leading to disruptions
in operations and user frustration.

6

CHAPTER 3
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS

Creating a student management system involves identifying various user
requirements to ensure that the system is efficient, user-friendly, and meets the needs
of all stakeholders. Here are the typical user requirements for a student management
system, categorized by user roles:

3.1 SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS

1. Operating system: Windows/Linux
2. Execution Environment: VS Code
3. Programming Language: Python 3.10.9
4. Libraries: Tkinter, PIL, typing

3.2 HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS

1. Processor-Intel i5 or higher
2. RAM – 8GB or higher
3. Storage-256GB SSD or above
4. Internet connection-40Mbps or more
5. Display-High-resolution monitor

3.3 USER REQUIREMENTS

Creating a student management system involves identifying various user
requirements to ensure that the system is efficient, user-friendly, and meets the needs
of all stakeholders. Here are the typical user requirements for a student management
system, categorized by user roles:
•

User Authentication and Authorization: The system should allow different
users such as administrators, teachers, students, and parents to log in with
secure authentication methods and access only the features and information
appropriate to their roles.
7

•

Student Information Management: It should be able to store and manage
student data including personal information, academic records, attendance,
disciplinary records, and health records.

•

Course

and

Curriculum

Management:

The

system

should

allow

administrators and teachers to create, manage, and update courses, syllabi,
and curriculum materials. This includes scheduling classes, assigning teachers
to courses, and managing class resources.
•

Reporting and Analytics: The system should provide reporting and analytics
capabilities for administrators to track key metrics such as student
performance, attendance rates, and demographic trends. This can help in
making data-driven decisions and improving overall educational outcomes.

•

Security and Data Privacy: Data security and privacy should be a top priority,
with features like role-based access control, encryption, regular backups, and
compliance with relevant data protection regulations such as GDPR or
FERPA.

•

User Support and Training: The system should provide adequate user support
resources such as documentation, tutorials, and helpdesk assistance, as well
as training for administrators, teachers, students, and parents to use the
system effectively.

8

CHAPTER 4
SYSTEM DESIGN
Designing a Student Management System (SMS) involves creating a detailed
architecture and defining the components that will interact to fulfill the requirements
gathered during the analysis phase. The system design includes both high-level
architecture and detailed component design. Below is a comprehensive guide to the
system design of a Student Management System:
4.1 PROPOSED METHODS
A student management system can employ various methods to effectively manage
student information and academic processes. One approach is through a centralized
database that stores comprehensive student records, including personal details,
academic achievements, attendance, and disciplinary history. This database can be
accessed by authorized users through a secure login system, ensuring data privacy
and security. Additionally, the system can incorporate features for course and
curriculum management, allowing administrators and teachers to create, schedule,
and update courses and syllabi. Automated attendance tracking methods, such as
biometric or RFID systems, can streamline the process of recording student
attendance,

reducing

administrative

workload.

Grading

and

assessment

functionalities can facilitate the timely input of grades, calculation of GPA, and
generation of report cards, providing valuable feedback to students and parents.
Communication and collaboration tools, such as messaging platforms and discussion
forums, foster effective communication between teachers, students, and parents,
promoting engagement and involvement in the educational process. Finally,
integration with other systems, such as learning management systems and school
management software, ensures seamless data exchange and workflow automation,
enhancing overall efficiency and productivity.

9

4.2 ARCHITECTUR DIAGRAM

Fig 4.2.1 Architecture diagram

4.3 USE CASE DIAGRAM

Fig 4.3.1 Use case diagram

10

4.4 TECHNOLOGY DESCRIPTION

A student management system typically leverages a variety of technologies to fulfill
its functionalities efficiently and securely. Here's a breakdown of some key
technologies commonly used in such systems:
1. Python: Python is a widely used general-purpose, high level programming
language. It was initially designed by Guido van Rossum in 1991 and
developed by Python Software Foundation. It was mainly developed for
emphasis on code readability, and its syntax allows programmers to express
concepts in fewer lines of code.
Python is a programming language that lets you work quickly and integrate
systems more efficiently.
Python is dynamically typed and garbage-collected. It supports multiple
programming

paradigms,

including

procedural,

object-oriented,

and

functional programming. Python is often described as a "batteries included"
language due to its comprehensive standard library.
2. Tkinter Tk: Tkinter is the standard Python interface to the Tk GUI toolkit. It
is a lightweight, easy-to-learn, and cross-platform GUI library for creating
desktop applications. Tkinter provides a wide range of widgets, such as
buttons, labels, text boxes, menus, canvases, and more. It is included in the
standard Python distribution, making it a convenient choice for rapid
application development.
3. Widgets: TKinter provides a variety of widgets (UI components) such as
buttons, labels, text boxes, check buttons, radio buttons, list boxes, menus,
and more. These widgets can be arranged and configured to create interactive
GUIs.
4. Geometry Management: TKinter offers several geometry managers (pack,
grid, and place) to organize and layout widgets within a window or frame.
5. Event Handling: TKinter allows developers to bind functions or methods to
events triggered by user interactions with the GUI components. This enables
event-driven programming, where actions are performed in response to user
inputs.

11

6. Customization: Developers can customize the appearance and behaviour of
widgets by specifying various options such as colors, fonts, sizes, and event
bindings.
7. Integration with Python: TKinter is included with Python standard library, so
there's no need to install any additional packages. It provides a simple and
easy-to-use interface for creating GUI applications directly within Python
scripts.
8. Tkinter ttk: ttk (themed Tkinter) is a themed widget set for Tkinter. It
provides a more modern and visually appealing appearance for Tkinter
applications. ttk includes a variety of themes and styles, which can be
customized to create a consistent and visually appealing user interface.
9. PIL (Pillow): PIL (Python Imaging Library) is a powerful Python library for
working with images. It provides features for loading, manipulating, and
saving various image formats, such as JPEG, PNG, GIF, and BMP. Pillow is a
friendly fork of PIL, which is more actively maintained and includes
additional features.

12

CHAPTER 5

IMPLEMENTATION & TESTING

Implementing and testing a Student Management System ( SMS) involves a series of
structured steps to ensure the system meets all requirements and functions as
intended. Below is a detailed guide for the implementation and testing process.
5.1 IMPLEMENTATION
Importing the necessary libraries: By importing the tkinker library we used widgets
like button, label, label frame to set and get the data from the interface and from
typing library we use text widget to display text. Also from PIL library we use Image
and ImageTk widgets to display the image properly.

Fig 5.1.1 Login Page

13

Code:
def login(self):
if self.txt_email.get()=="" or self.txt_pass_.get()=="":
messagebox.showerror("Error","All fields are required",parent=self.root)
else:
try:
con=sqlite3.connect(database="sms.db")

cur=con.cursor()
cur.execute("select

*

from

employee

where

email=?

and

password=?",(self.txt_email.get(),self.txt_pass_.get()))
row=cur.fetchone()
if row==None:
messagebox.showerror("Error","Invalid

USERNAME

&

PASSWORD",parent=self.root)

else:
messagebox.showinfo("Success",f"Welcome:
{self.txt_email.get()}",parent=self.root)
self.root.destroy()
os.system("python dashboard.py")
con.close()
except Exception as es:
messagebox.showerror("Error",f"Error Due to: {str(es)}",parent=self.root)

Description: Here after running the code First comes the login page where we have
to enter the required Email and password if they previously exist. (Fig 5.1.1)
Then we get logged in or else it pops an error saying email or password incorrect.

14

Fig 5.1.2 Forget password page

Description: This page gets popped when user needs to reset the password. For that
user need to give correct answer for Security question then the password gets reset.
(Fig 5.1.2)

Fig 5.1.3 Register page

Description: This page gets open when there in some new user and they wants to
register in this application. For that they have to press Register here in the login page
so that the get redirected into this page. By giving the required detains they can get
registered. (Fig 5.1.3)

In the login page if they get logged in the immediately get redirected into dashboard.
15

Description: Then we go to the main dashboard and here we get all the options about
the student. (Fig 5.1.4)

Fig 5.1.4 Dashboard view

Description: when we go to course then we get options regarding course like course
name duration etc and we have to enter the required details and these details will get
stored in a database created. (Fig 5.1.5)

Fig 5.1.5 Course view

16

Description:
Here by the below code we create database named sms.db and init we create different
tables like course, student, result.these tablese are used to store the data entered by the
user from the interfacs.

Database code:

import sqlite3
def create_db():
con=sqlite3.connect(database="sms.db")
cur=con.cursor()
cur.execute("CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS course(cid INTEGER PRIMARY
KEY AUTOINCREMENT,name text,duration text,charges text,description text)")
con.commit()

cur.execute("CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS student(roll INTEGER PRIMARY
KEY

AUTOINCREMENT,name

text,email

text,gender

text,dob

text,contact

text,admission text,course text,state text,city text,pin text,address text)")
con.commit()

cur.execute("CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS result(rid INTEGER PRIMARY
KEY AUTOINCREMENT,roll text,name text,course text,marks_ob text,full_marks
text,per text)")
con.commit()

con.close()

create_db()

17

Description: Here Student interface is same like course interface ,here also we enter
the required details and store the details in the data base. (Fig 5.1.6)

Fig 5.1.6 Student view

Description: from student interface we go to result and here we select the roll number
and it displays the name and course of the selected roll no and we enter the marks here
and submit. (Fig 5.1.7)

Fig 5.1.7 Student view

18

Description: Then from view student we can display the student report in the assigned
columns. These student report details are fetched from the tables created in the sms.db
database and also we can delete the report of the respective roll number. (Fig 5.1.8)

Fig 5.1.8 Result view

Description: And also we can update, delete, clear the fields of the student.

5.2 TESTING
Testing a Student Management System (SMS) is a critical phase to ensure that the
system is robust, reliable, and meets the specified requirements. This involves several
types of testing, each aimed at validating different aspects of the system.
Description: In the dashboard in course we entered the details and it successfully got
saved and displayed on the side screen. We also searched the details by referring the
course name.
And the duration, charges, description are updated from the previous stored data. The
data got deleted by pressing delete. Clear cleared all the fields on the panel.

19

Fig 5.2.1 Course view

Description: In the student details after entering the required details when we press
save it get saved into the table and displayed on the screen. Search fetched the details
of student. Update, Delete, Clear worked same as the previous interface.

Fig 5.2.1 Student view

Description: In this result interface we select the roll number from the list and the
name and course got displayed. Also after entering the marks percentage got
calculated.

20

Fig 5.2.3 Course view

Description: In this interface by searching the roll number we got displayed the report
of the selected roll number.

Fig 5.2.4 Course view

21

CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSION & FUTURE SCOPE
6.1 CONCLUSION
The conclusion of a real-time project student management system using Python would
highlight the efficiency and effectiveness of the system in managing student data. The
project would have demonstrated features such as comprehensive student profiles,
efficient attendance tracking, academic progress monitoring, communication portals,
and integrated financial management. These features would have contributed to
streamlined administrative processes, reduced manual errors, and promoted informed
decision-making.
6.2 FUTURE SCOPE
The future scope of such a system is vast. There are several areas for potential
development and enhancement:

Artificial Intelligence (AI) Integration: The system could incorporate AI to enable
predictive analytics, personalized learning paths, and automated decision-making
processes. This would make the system more intelligent and proactive. Mobile

Accessibility: With the increasing reliance on mobile devices, the system could be
made more mobile-friendly. This would provide on-the-go access to information for
both administrators and stakeholders.

Blockchain Security: As data security becomes a top priority, the system could
incorporate blockchain technology. This would ensure a secure and transparent
system, safeguarding sensitive student information.

Machine Learning: The system could use machine learning algorithms to analyze
student data and provide insights. This could help in identifying trends, predicting
student performance, and providing personalized feedback.

22

REFERENCES

1.

https://pywebio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

2. https://geeksforgeeks.org/python-gui-tkinter/

3. https://www.javatpoint.com/python-tkinter

4. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-to-sqlite/

5. https://chatgpt.com/

23

